[SOMBER MUSIC]
>> In 1988, I was doing a
film about Tibetan Buddhism
in India, when His Holiness
the Dalai Lama suggested that I
film the State Oracle of Tibet
going into one of his rare
trances.
I was somewhat surprised
and very delighted.
This highly ritualized
form of spirit possession
had been extremely secretive,
a very esoteric appendage
to the body of Tibetan Buddhism.
To my knowledge, it had
never been filmed before.
[TIBETAN HORNS BLOWING]
[CYMBALS]
The events of that morning
were unlike anything
I had ever
encountered and raised
deeply puzzling questions
about the nature of self
and consciousness,
let alone the reality
of spirits and their
ability to enter
our world through the
vessel of a human body.
[CYMBALS]
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
Many strange things
happened that morning.
Some of them could be filmed.
But some of them, well, one
of them in particular, I've
been wanting to follow-up
on for the last 15 years.
>> [CRYING]
>> What is this
thing we call self,
this enigmatic and supposedly
consistent identity
we're apparently born with?
>> [BABBLING]
>> My seven-month-old
granddaughter on the day before
I leave for India.
Clearly, her sense
of herself is already
developing, long before
language and the "I" word
have become part of
her mental scenery.
She dwells in the
present moment,
unlike her grandfather,
who is up the entire night
before leaving
doing the mountains
of paperwork modern life
demands when you leave it behind
for a few months.
Far from dwelling in the
moment, his sense of self
is fragmentary,
babbling incoherently,
and fully dependent
on black coffee
to maintain any sense of
the present whatsoever.
[BUZZING]
[SLURPING]
At the base of the Dhauladhar
Range of the Greater Himalayas,
Upper Dharamsala,
or McCleod Ganj,
straddles a ridge
at about 6,000 feet.
It's home to the Tibetan
government in exile
and the Dalai Lama,
whose compound occupies
a hill at one end of the town.
It is also the home of four
oracles, the unusual trance
state when a spirit
supposedly takes possession
of the body of a medium to give
advice and predict the future.
The most widely
known of the four
is the State Oracle
of Tibet, the Nechung,
whose medium resides
at a monastery, part
of a large complex
halfway between the upper
and lower towns.
[MONKS CHANTING]
The Nechung Oracle
I filmed in 1988
is the 14th in a line that
dates back four centuries.
Thubten Nodup was an ordinary
monk in the Nechung Monastery
when he fell down in a
spontaneous trance a few years
after the death of
the 13th medium.
[CYMBALS, HORNS PLAY]
After extensive testing,
he was confirmed
as the physical basis
for Dorje Drakden,
the emissary and oracular
voice of the Pehar,
the five major spirit
kings who have protected
Tibetan Buddhism since the 8th
century, when, as legend tells,
they were subdued by the
great Indian tantric master,
Padmasambhava.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> I became the Nechung
medium, or rather,
I was possessed for the first
time by the Nechung Oracle,
by the Nechung spirit, in
1987 on the 31st of March.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> So I as, at that time, an
ordinary monk of the monastery.
And let the previous
Oracle passed away in 1984,
around April.
>> The scientific world view
is tangible, measurable,
empirical.
Its realm is space and time.
But in the Buddhist
great chain of being,
there are six
realms of existence.
And within them,
sentient beings can
exist on 31 different planes.
We human beings exist on
the level of gross form.
Nature spirits exist on the
level of very subtle forms
or are completely formless.
>> So among these formless
spirits, are like human being.
Some are religious minded.
Some are non-believer.
I'm not very sure whether
there is Communist or not.
I don't know.
[LAUGHS]
Otherwise, I'm quite sure, I
think that among these spirits,
I think they are Buddhists
or Hindus as a result.
I think most of them, I
think Christians and Muslim.
I think so.
>> When the 8th century Indian
master Padmasambhava came
to Tibet to bring Buddhism
to its inhabitants,
he found a warlike people
practicing a highly developed
form of nature
religion called Bon.
Mountains, lakes,
forests, rivers
all had their local deity.
They were alive and animated
through the spirits' actions.
Legend has it that
Padmasambhava, or Guru
Rinpoche, as he's
called by the Tibetans,
went around the country
subduing the major local spirits
through his great
spiritual attainment,
and oath-binding them to protect
the Buddhadharma, the Buddhist
flash of insight into the
ultimate nature of reality.
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Om, ah, hum.
Om, ah, hum.
[CHANTING IN TIBETAN]
>> The Tibetans believe the
spirits that Guru Rinpoche
oath-bound as Dharma protectors
have been taking possession
of a succession of numerous
mediums over the last 1,200
years to act as oracles, giving
advice on spiritual practice
in worldly matters,
doing healings,
predicting the future, and, in
the case of the state oracles,
advising on public
and religious policy.
It's related that the Nechung
Oracle, institutionalized over
350 years ago as a principal
advisor to the government,
told the Dalai Lama
through the previous medium
the precise moment and route to
take to avoid the Red Army when
he fled Tibet in 1959.
How accurate are
the oracles that
are being used by
yourself, the Nechung?
>> Mm.
Oh, yeah, many factor involved.
Firstly, the spirit itself,
something reliable, of course.
Then take as
example Nechung now.
The oracle Nechung
itself, very reliable.
Then the medium--
>> Medium.
>> The medium, I think
there are from birth,
you see some differences, the
body condition, physical side.
Then on top of that, they
need certain meditation
or certain practice.
Then the medium gaining more
deeper sort of spiritual
experiences.
Then entrance become easier
and more clear, more reliable.
The negative
spirit, then they're
entering become more difficult.
So the medium's level
of practice, very,
very important,
eventually becoming
more clearer, clearer.
[BELL RINGING]
>> [CHANTING]
>> And then you can trust.
>> I brought His
Holiness a gift,
a scientific version
of an oracle,
a weather station with a remote
console that measures just
about everything.
And it's supposed
to do forecasting,
though thunderstorms here
can roll over the mountains
with practically no warning.
Two of the household monks help
His Holiness's younger brother
and I install it on the
roof of his residence.
>> They don't listen, these two.
They think they're enlightened.
>> You know, I always felt that
there are oracles everywhere.
If you go in the
hills of Dharamsala
among the local people,
every village has one.
>> Many other people.
>> Yeah, but they
don't announce it.
Now since all our origins of
shamanistic nature, I'm sure,
you know, everywhere, you know,
there must have been oracles.
And in the Western world
today, say, any country,
there must have been.
But I think Christianity has a
lot to do with abolishing them.
>> Christianity accepted the
idea of spirit possession
but sought to marginalize it.
If the spirits weren't
necessarily evil,
they were pagan and to be
avoided by God-fearing folk.
Perhaps part of
the reason for this
was the physical manifestations
of trance possession,
the distortion of the face
and voice often accompanied
by superhuman feats of strength,
or the piercing of the body
with sharp implements.
>> I used to get very
scared of trances.
And one of the greatest
fears as a child
is to go and approach a--
what do you call-- oracle.
Because most of the oracles
are in a wrathful form.
>> Wrathful.
OK?
And that is-- for a
child, it's pretty scary.
- [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
- The wrathful form of
the Nechung in 1988.
- [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Without warning, a layman
went into spontaneous trance.
The two oracles shrieked
at one another face
to face as if they wanted
to tear each other apart.
- [SHOUTING IN TIBETAN]
>> But I was told that, in fact,
the second spirit was paying
homage to Nechung.
If that was homage, I wondered
what an argument could possibly
look like.
- [SHOUTING IN TIBETAN]
>> Suddenly, the second
oracle popped out of trance.
And the man, unaware
of what had happened,
was carried off, leaving me with
more questions than answers.
But this was nothing compared
to what happened next .
>> I mean, what's really going
on, in an objective fashion?
>> What's really going on?
>> This is the big question.
>> And you're Harvard-trained.
>> That's correct.
>> PhD.
>> How do you explain
this phenomenon?
>> Yeah, I'm still trying
to work my way through that.
>> The longer you're
involved with it,
the more magic and mystery seems
to be what's really going on.
>> While at any given time,
there can be hundreds of young
Western tourists
visiting Dharamsala,
most stay for just a week or
two and move on, never having
looked beneath the surface.
But there are also dozens of
long-term residents, scholars,
students, and
teachers, who encounter
the magical sight
of Tibetan Buddhism
almost on a daily basis.
In one way or
another, they grapple
with the phenomenon of oracles.
>> Yeah.
Our teachers,
usually when they--
they usually tell us.
Because Buddhism is so full.
It's so vast.
And they say, take what you can.
And the rest, if
you can't handle,
or as Lama Yeshe, would
say, if it freaks you out,
just leave it.
You know, you can take
it-- look at it later.
So this whole thing with
deities and oracles and all
this magical stuff,
I've just kind of
left aside for the time being.
>> One told me, oh, from
now until your death,
you will have an
endless problems.
[LAUGHS]
How did you feel?
>> There wasn't a lot
I could do about it.
And I went to see a lama.
Like, lamas are kind
of higher than oracles.
>> They should be.
>> I went to this lama.
And everybody said,
oh, go see this lama.
I went and saw this lama.
And he said, oh, yes, you'll
get paralysis, heart problem.
And he went from there.
[LAUGHS]
That was thrilling.
>> When you were up in Tibet,
I guess you were with nomadic
tribes or were you--
>> Yes, mostly nomadic people.
>> John Vincent Bellezza
is an explorer and cultural
historian--
>> Both Buddhist and Bonpo.
>> --who has spent years
researching village oracles
on the Tibetan Plateau.
>> So what actually is going on?
As I said, there
are a number of--
I mean, a number of theories
that are churned about.
>> Such as--
>> Such as a state of
self-induced psychosis,
where there's a disassociation
of normal personality,
and some other type
of personality,
perhaps more deeply seated
in the psyche, emerges,
rears its head and
becomes the new persona.
>> Where does the old
consciousness go then?
>> This is a very good question.
Where does the old conscious go?
It seems to be display--
I mean, according to most
traditional definitions
as trance states,
particularly in Tibet.
The consciousness of the medium
is displaced, is actually
removed from his
body, his or her body,
and exists somewhere
else, exists in a mirror,
or exists in the ethers,
but actually leaves
the person's body and is
replaced by the consciousness
of the deity.
Part of the problem
enlies the currency.
The very currency of the
trance state, consciousness,
has not been
satisfactorily delineated
in a scientific fashion.
So how can we understand
the phenomena of trance,
of mediumship, which is based
on consciousness, when we don't
even have a firm understanding
of what constitutes
human consciousness?
>> 1988, South India.
As the Nechung Oracle tossed
out barley seeds to the monks
as a blessing, I
took my attention off
of him for just a second.
At that precise
moment, something
I can only describe as a
force shot through my body,
practically blowing
me off the steps.
Once I'd recovered
from the shock,
I looked around,
expecting others
to be wondering what hit them.
But no one else seemed affected.
I played back the moment.
Out of the corner of my eye, I'd
seen the plane of his arm sweep
past me right at
that very second.
But what was it that entered me?
It seemed to be conscious,
like something going quickly
through me, checking me out.
But why?
[WIND BLOWING]
Normally, a state
oracle only goes
into trance for the Dalai
Lama or for the cabinet
of the government in exile.
But the Nechung will
sometimes go into trance
to predict and guide
the spiritual welfare
of his monastery.
[TIBETAN HORNS]
>> The people living around
Nechung Monastery will hear
the certain sound of the thigh
bone trumpets and the drums
being drummed.
And they will know
that the oracle
is about to go into trance.
And so they will run there.
These trance sessions are
usually extremely private.
You are very, very lucky
if you get tipped off
or you just happen to be
there by chance to attend one.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> He is doing a meditation.
So there's no set, sort
of gradual progression
of his falling in trance.
However, when he
himself sits there,
and if he listens to the
invitation prayer and so forth,
he sort of feels a
feeling of anxiety
and very small vibrations,
first, from the fingers onward,
and then the heartbeat.
The heartbeat increases.
And then the vibration
comes from the feet.
And then he feels like a
feeling kind of floating.
>> Swelling.
>> Swelling, yeah.
And then all of a sudden,
it's like in a snap
that he falls unconscious.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
>> You asked about Tenma.
>> Yeah.
>> Tenma first appeared
on our hillside around
the mid-'90s at a
spring teaching.
It was in the morning.
I was in the audience.
His Holiness was teaching.
And suddenly, there
was a woman's voice,
extremely powerful, singing
in the crowded courtyard.
And--
>> By singing, you mean--
>> Yes, it had the sound
of being arias or--
yes.
So bodyguards immediately rushed
over and did rugged tackles
on her, and felled her,
and dragged her out
because it was assumed
that she was somebody who
had got a little over the top.
And then in the afternoon,
His Holiness was teaching.
He was actually,
I think, reading
a transmission of a text, when
the singing started again.
And he was reading and just
going like this, which meant,
leave her alone.
>> What's she like?
>> Petite, extremely
pretty, shy, discreet.
When she first came, she
had beautiful pink cheeks,
straight from the
nomad land of Kham.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Oh, yeah.
>> The Tibetans refer
to her as Khandro,
which is their word for
sky-dancing goddess.
Now in her late 20s,
she grew up a nomad
in Kham, the far eastern
province of old Tibet.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
- Like other new
arrivals from Tibet,
she made her way to Dharamsala.
But her story was an
astonishing odyssey, even here,
where incredible
stories are commonplace.
When she kept going
into trance at audiences
for newly arrived Tibetans
and at public teachings,
the Dalai Lama requested
an investigation.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> In Tibet, there are so
many people who are oracles.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> But the details who are
coming inside their bodies are
very small in their power.
>> Supervising the investigation
at the request of the Dalai
Lama was Khalka Jetsun
Dhampa Rinpoche,
the traditional head of the
Mongolian branch of Tibetan
Buddhism.
[DRUMS, CHANTING]
During the investigation, it
appeared increasingly possible
that through this
young Tibetan women
were coming some of
the highest deities
in the Tibetan pantheon,
primarily a few of the 12 Tenma
Goddesses, who are in the
extended retinue of the very
highest female protector
deity of Tibet, Palden Lhamo.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> It was a very big job to
confirm that she was actually
a powerful spirit, and very
important because His Holiness
asked for it, you know.
And if they would make
any mistake in this,
it would result in a
very bad situation.
>> But how did he actually
determine that she was Tenma?
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> If you study and
practice Palden Lhamo,
you will be able to recognize
the Tenma Chunyi, the 12 Tenma.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
Actually, there are
many realized masters
who can see the
deities, how they look,
what they are wearing.
Are they riding a horse
or a lion or whatever?
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> And when His Holiness asked
Rinpoche, so what do you think?
What is it?
Is it important?
Who is coming inside her body?
Rinpoche replied, I can tell
that there is the Tenma,
one or two or
three of the Tenmas
are coming inside her body.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> But he would be better
to have the Nechung Oracle
and this oracle meet in trance.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Because the Nechung can also
recognize who is possessing her
and make a determination.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
In fact, when the Nechung
Oracle is in trance,
if a fake oracle comes
into his presence,
he will recognize the phony
and throw him out immediately.
And when the Nechung Oracle
came and went into trance,
he confirmed that
she is indeed real--
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> --and that in future,
she'll become very beneficial
for the Tibetan people.
>> [CHANTING]
>> Once the Nechung's
confirmation was accepted,
the Dalai Lama requested that
she begin intensive practice
to keep her body's channels
clear of obstructions.
>> [CHANTING]
>> She was also asked to keep a
low profile out of concern that
she would be besieged by
people wanting her to predict
the future.
>> [CHANTING]
[CHANTING]
>> Regardless of what happens
to the self, the person,
or the consciousness
during trance,
the possession affects the
body of the medium profoundly.
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
>> The physical force when
trance, very forceful.
Their body become like rock.
>> And apparently, as my own
experience in 1988 seemed
to show, they appear to be able
to project something of that
intense energy, if not
some conscious awareness,
at a distance.
[CHANTING]
The trances also take their
toll on the body of the medium.
Historically, the
Nechung Oracles
have not lived much
beyond 50 years.
In the case of the Tenma,
she had difficulties
even before she first began
to be possessed at age eight.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> She relates that,
as a young child,
she showed a great
concern for all life,
even feeling sorry for the
tics she had to remove from
the sheep.
And apparently, she showed
an early uncanny ability
to tell people what was
happening in their lives.
[CHANTING]
[TIBETAN HORNS AND CYMBALS]
Her trances started
spontaneously at age eight.
Once, while walking
on a mountainside,
she went into trance and
fell down the steep slope.
She was unconscious for a week.
In her coma, she had a vision of
goddesses of light placing her
on a throne and offering her
garlands of flowers and ritual
barley cakes.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Within a few years,
she made her way to Lhasa,
the capital of Tibet, where she
went into trance on the steps
of the Jokhang Temple and
started shouting for Tibetan
freedom.
Immediately, a Chinese
policeman started to beat her
with his rifle butt.
But apparently, she was
so powerful in her trance
that she took the
gun away from him.
[CHANTING]
Perhaps because the
police considered her mad,
they didn't arrest her.
And when she
recovered, she didn't
know what she had shouted.
She wasn't even aware
that Tibet was occupied.
She was advised to
flee Lhasa and go home.
Instead, with no money or
food, she made her way south,
where she relates that a
mysterious old man, half
naked like an Indian
sadhu, gave her money
and told her to go to
where the Dalai Lama lives.
It took her 27 days, sometimes
going a week without food,
to cross the Himalayas.
Like Nechung, the
Gadong is a state oracle
with his own monastery that
he's had to rebuild in exile.
Unlike Nechung, it's a
hereditary oracleship,
passing from father to son.
While he is called in
for official trances,
it's usually
alongside the Nechung
because the Gadong Oracle in
trance does not yet speak.
>> No, still I'm not.
>> It's still not.
>> I don't know.
This is not my trouble.
It's not having secrets.
>> [LAUGHS] It's the
trouble of the spirit.
>> Yeah.
Sometimes it happened.
>> Yes.
>> Because Lhamo,
the other oracle,
he used to-- his
father never speak.
>> The Gadong medium is
referring to the third state
oracle, the Sangpa, who
died a few years ago.
Like Gadong, it's a
hereditary oracleship,
passing from father to son
for many hundreds of years.
I've met the eldest son of the
late Sangpa, Tenzin Choejor.
at a party.
He's an aspiring
photographer who would
prefer not to be an oracle.
>> Oracle, I mean, you know?
You have to put on
lots of time in,
you know, getting involved
with spiritual things.
You have to do lots of prayers.
And photography is also
something where you
have to spend a lot of time.
And it takes times to grow.
[SHUTTER CLICKING]
[BIRDS CALLING]
Why I want to become
a photographer
is to tell the words
about Tibetan people
and the situation
through my photography,
not because I want to
become a photographer
and make lots of money from it.
But you know, if it is my
destiny to become an oracle,
then I would accept it.
[SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> I screened the 1988 sequence
for the Nechung medium to see
if he can shed some light on
what happened to me when I was
practically blown off my feet.
>> [SHOUTING]
>> Before we can get to it,
an unusual coincidence comes
to light.
>> [PANTING, SHOUTING]
>> It's the Sangpa.
>> It turns out that the
layman who spontaneously went
into trance was none other
than the Sangpa medium.
And the wrathful shrieking
was the very first time
the oracle spoke.
Standing behind him,
unnoticed by me or the camera,
was an eight-year-old
Tenzin Choejor.
Did your father ever
talk to you about what's
involved in being an oracle?
It is a hereditary line.
>> Yeah.
>> It's unusual that your father
wouldn't have said anything.
Do you think maybe he thought he
might be the last of the line?
>> No.
I really have no idea
how my father thought.
[LAUGHS]
>> It's just very interesting.
>> I think the tradition
will keep going.
I think so.
But it is also--
I mean, it's not upon my father
to decide who is the oracle.
You know?
It just-- you know?
I don't know.
It just happens, you know?
>> [CHANTING]
>> There is a fourth
Oracle in Dharamsala.
Unlike the state
oracles that only
go into a trance
for the Dalai Lama
or the government in
exile, or the Tenma
who has the role of
protecting the Buddha Dharma,
Yudronma is a village oracle,
used for consultations
by individuals.
>> But I was asked, so I please
went to ask whether I have some
obstacles.
>> [CHANTING]
>> Village oracles are
abundant within Tibet
and in the traditionally
Tibetan areas of India,
like Spiti and Ladakh.
There are no less than 17
village oracles in Spiti,
a 150-kilometer long, sparsely
populated and isolated
Himalayan valley that rises
upwards from 12,000 feet
and has long been inhabited
by ethnic Tibetans.
>> [CHANTING]
>> Village oracles
up here hearken back
to the pre-Buddhist
Tibet of Guru Rinpoche.
They tend to be possessed by
lower level nature spirits
and are used principally for
healings and social matters.
>> [SNORTING]
[BELLS RINGING]
>> Essentially, they
are self-appointed,
with no authentication process
other than their acceptance
by the local population.
There is always the potential
for fakery and abuse
of their authority.
>> Now, in a village,
someone to go into a trance,
then the medium
becomes of high status.
And then, along with ability
to go into trance or having
the ability to put
on an act, faking it,
it becomes a tremendous
source of income.
People come and
give you offering.
And then you do your thing.
So it's a business.
Actually, there was
supposed to be a consultant,
consultants in people's
spiritual development,
not in earthly welfare.
>> While they accept
the reality of oracles,
a large number of educated lay
Tibetans feel some ambivalence
about their use in
the modern world.
But there is a small
minority, those
who want complete
independence for Tibet
rather than the Dalai Lama's
middle path approach, who
are critical of
the use of oracles,
especially for making
political decisions.
>> In a democratic society,
the elected people have
the responsibility to make
decisions and to be responsible
for their country, put the blame
on some non-existent, nameless,
and formless being.
>> Even in old Tibet, a lot
of the oracles faced not only
doubt but criticism.
>> Though he used to live here
in Dharamsala, the essayist,
and novelist Jamyang Norbu has
moved with his family to rural
Tennessee.
>> Even in public, the Tibetan
national oracle has been booed
in public.
After he-- yeah, he
predicted wrongly
about the British invasion,
the [INAUDIBLE] invasion.
And there's 700 Tibetans
in one day were massacred.
He said that the Tibetans
are not to worry,
that the heavenly armies
would back up the militia
and that he would be there
to lead the heavenly armies.
And of course, you know, it
was just massive carnage.
They had Gatling guns.
And 700 Tibetan militia
were just slaughtered.
And people avoid responsibility
by asking the oracle.
If you invoke the
oracle, then, you
know, your hands, it's clean.
I didn't say that.
The oracle made the decision.
>> Oracles are also misused in
other ways than for avoiding
responsibility and earthly gain.
Their spirits are
sometimes propitiated
as enlightened deities,
worthy of going to
for spiritual refuge.
>> These are mundane
sort of spirit.
So should not consider
them as a refuge.
But unfortunately, due
to lack of knowledge
about Buddha Dharma, then
sometimes, the people
do some of--
absolute sort of protector,
something like that,
ultimate protector.
Consider it or treated
them almost like a Buddha.
That's totally wrong.
How do you say?
Feeding birds, feeding place.
>> Yeah.
>> Then the second, protection.
>> I don't know.
It's lot of small birds,
you see, together.
Then-- what do you call-- hawk
sometimes, you see, they come.
So this is the one
way of protection.
>> The issue of improper use
of oracles reached a head
in the 1990s, with a seething
controversy that culminated
in a horrible ritual murder.
The beginnings of
the Shugden Oracle
are murky, going back
at least 350 years
to the time of the
Fifth Dalai Lama.
What is clear is that at
the end of the last century,
an influential high lama
elevated this relatively minor
oracle to be the chief
protector of the Gelug
school, the Dalai Lama's own
branch of Tibetan Buddhism.
Despite the warnings of
the previous Dalai Lama,
many of the Gelugs began
to propitiate this spirit
as fully enlightened.
The problems intensified
when the oracle proclaimed
that the Gelugs should
not do any practices
of the other three schools.
This led to sectarian rifts and
concerns by the other schools
that the already
powerful Gelugs were
using this oracle for political,
not spiritual advancement.
The present Dalai Lama, as the
political head of all Tibetans,
has always been
strictly nonsectarian
and has therefore
practiced teachings
from all four schools.
The Shugden Oracle's
insistence on doctrinal purity,
if not a personal attack
on him, was certainly
a thorn in the side of his
policy of nonsectarianism.
>> In other words, it is a
fundamentalist, Gelugpa oracle.
And the Dalai Lama
necessarily had
to say, if you are closely
associated with that oracle,
you can't be closely
associated with me
because my constituency isn't
limited just to one sect.
>> The Dalai Lama's
response was very direct.
He stated that the
practice of Shugden
was a form of spirit worship and
was harmful to the Dalai Lama
institution and Tibetan unity.
While he could not tell
anyone not to practice it,
he would ask
practitioners of Shugden
not to attend his teachings.
This request shook the Gelug
sect to its foundations.
Large numbers of the high
lamas were Shugden devotees.
And the practice was
even well-established
among Western students.
A profound choice
had to be made.
A Western friend of mine
wrote me, "Even today, I
find it hard to talk about,
though I don't feel especially
connected anymore.
But it went very deep.
And the process of
stopping is very complex.
The spirit has a firm hold.
It's akin to the feelings
held by cult followers
when trying to separate.
Huge guilt stuff."
While nearly all the Gelugs gave
up the practice, some did not.
And there were elements
in the Tibetan community
who were overzealous in how they
dealt with those who refused.
This led to charges
of witch hunts.
Things reached an
almost absurd plateau
when the more radical
Shugden supporters
charged that the Dalai
Lama was trying to suppress
their religious freedom.
As far from the truth
as this was, it did
illustrate the
extremely dangerous mood
that was brewing.
On a night in February
1997, the head
of the Institute of
Buddhist Dialectics
and an outspoken critic of
the extremes of the Shugden
supporters was followed back
to Dharamsala from Delhi
and ritually murdered, along
with two young assistants.
>> He was a really close
friend and a teacher.
But the way of
death, so unpleasant.
I've never seen murder.
You know, murder is a
part of the human life.
But people sort of digging
knives in other people,
and cutting their
throat, and stabbing them
all over the place-- and the
young boys who died with him.
Well, the Dalai Lama
said, you can't feel sorry
for a man who's had
a wonderful life.
You feel sorry for the
man who killed him.
I mean, I really do
feel sorry for them.
You can't feel
sorry for somebody
who had an excellent life.
But the young boys who
died with him, terrible.
>> The Indian police believe
the perpetrators escaped
into Chinese Tibet, where
they apparently remain beyond
the reach of Indian law.
It's common belief here that
they were supported and funded
by the Chinese Secret
Service to create disunity
among the Tibetan
community in exile.
Though the Dalai Lama agrees
that oracles have often
been misused, he feels
that to stop their use
would mean abandoning a
unique part of Tibetan culture
and would not be in keeping
with the Buddhist middle way.
>> Religion also
sometimes misused.
Does, I think, a
little bit extreme.
If you entirely relying
on oracle, extreme.
If you entirely dismiss
these, that also extreme.
>> When you personally
use oracles,
what do you use them for?
>> Two types.
Like annual-- how do
you say-- meeting.
One category is something
like annual meeting.
[CHANTING]
But then there's some important
questions on matters as comes.
>> This is the annual
kind of meeting.
It's the first time
the Dalai Lama has ever
allowed it to be filmed.
He places me at a safe
distance so I'm not in the way.
But recalling that flash
of enormous energy passing
through my body,
there's a tingle
of excitement mixed with a
definite sense of familiarity.
And I can't help wishing
I was right in close.
Watching the sense of
self disappear like this
brings a certain fascination.
The Nechung, as is the
principle state oracle,
goes first into trance.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> [WHISPERING]
>> He's followed by the Gadong,
the oracle who does not yet
speak.
The Dalai Lama believes
it may be because
of his physical condition.
He contracted tuberculosis when
he came to India from Tibet.
But once he disappears
into trance,
whatever possesses him
makes a mighty effort
to get out a few words.
>> [SHOUTING]
>> Finally, the
Tenma is brought in.
While she's not a
state oracle, she
is a protector of
the Buddha Dharma,
the vast body of
Buddhist thought
she's been oath-bound to support
for the last 1,200 years.
- [PANTING]
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> Looking at this face, it
dawns on me that whether we try
to interpret this experience
from a Western psychological
perspective as sudden
dissociated or transpersonal
state of human consciousness,
or see it like the Tibetans
as a window unto a consciousness
that is completely non-human,
that ultimately, we
are witnessing the self
disappearing within an
experience of such depth
and subtlety that any
explanation for it will
necessarily come up short,
although it's perhaps worth
noting that the Tibetan
explanation engenders respect
for the experience, while
mainstream psychological
science treats it at best
as anomalous, and at worst,
as abnormal.
>> What did you learn?
>> Not particular
points to ask them.
This year, we will contact
with Chinese government.
So this should be successful.
And then, me personally,
visit different country
and some serious
obstacle, there are not.
They all say OK, no problem.
Then one occasion, the
Nechung Oracle much moved.
He asked me, I should live long.
Like human being, very much
emotion, nearly some crying.
And then Tenma, similar
sort of response
and some poems expressing,
again, on my long life,
a prayer, also some kind
of request, like that.
[CHANTING]
>> Whatever oracles
are, for the Dalai Lama,
they are not special.
They are just another input into
his decision-making process.
>> We are human beings.
These are oracle.
We are more important.
We have more responsibility.
I usually ask them
their suggestion.
If something, according
to our common sense,
or this is definite, only one
choice, then we take decision.
But if there are a few
choices, we feel dilemma.
Then ask different
views for-- how to say?
I mean, different views from
different people as well as
different oracle.
>> Right.
>> That usually, I do.
And then finally, usually
I do the divination.
But these things, you
need some meditation.
In my case, firstly,
I remember Buddha,
then Padmasambhava, then Lama
Tsongkhapa, then Mahakala.
>> After a lengthy sequence
of meditations that culminates
in the Buddhist view
of interdependency,
the Dalai Lama does a
traditional Tibetan divination.
In the mo, or dough
ball divination,
bowls of barley dough are
wrapped around pieces of paper
with choices written on them.
They are then rolled
around inside a bowl.
With the mind in a meditative
state that directly perceives
the interdependence
of all things,
the ball that first escapes
the rim sometimes becomes--
>> Speaker of truth.
Otherwise, this-- that ball--
>> A dough ball.
>> A dough ball
is just nonsense.
Silly!
[LAUGHTER]
But lot of meditations
and the understanding
of the reality of the nature--
>> Nature of
reality, yeah, yeah.
>> Or the interdependency.
>> Interdependence.
>> No independent absolute.
>> Maybe this is the crux of the
question of self that is raised
by trance possession.
If nothing exists with
absolute independence,
if things are only
interdependent,
then the whole notion of self
changes from some fixed idea
into something that is
open and elastic, something
that ultimately may
be only provisional.
Little wonder that
this strange state
of oracles that
has been happening
to human beings for thousands
if not hundreds of thousands
of years continues
to be accepted
as a normal part of
Buddhist reality,
even as it's been marginalized
by our recent scientific
worldview.
>> Science, very good sort
of method to investigate
what's the reality.
So I admire.
I respect.
That does not mean that
science knows everything.
Modern science, up to now,
mainly concentrate on a field
where you can see,
you can calculate,
or you can measurement.
>> Measure.
So that, the physical.
Formless field, you need
some different method.
>> Have you ever considered
the physiological testing
of oracles in trance?
>> Not yet.
>> Not yet?
Yeah.
Interesting question then.
>> Oh, yes, I want.
But then, of course,
first, we should have
the permission from the oracle.
Then if we get permission,
we will put there.
[LAUGHS]
That is the extra trouble.
>> Very good point.
>> We to approach very
gently, gentle way.
Needs some patience.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Right there.
What do you think could
have happened at that point?
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> So that's not a very--
an exclusive experience.
There are several
other people who have
experienced the same thing.
There are even some who are
going themselves in a trance.
So this sort of
electrifying experiences
happen quite often to somebody.
>> Just because of the
actual power of the oracle?
>> Sure.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
>> It's definitely like that.
And it's also seen
as a blessing.
>> It's a blessing.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THUNDER]